NARRATOR: MAJOR FUNDING FOR
THIS PROGRAM WAS PROVIDED BY
BETHLEHEM STEEL ANN G.
WHITMAN, KLEIN STEEL SERVICE,
ELAINE P. AND RICHARD U.
WILSON FOUNDATION, BRUNER
FOUNDATION AND ROCHESTER AREA
COMMUNITY FOUNDATION.
ADDITIONAL SUPPORT WAS
PROVIDED BY:
NARRATOR: FIRST
LIGHT IN ROCHESTER, NEW YORK.
IT'S COOL AND WET, AN ORDINARY
SEPTEMBER MORNING. BUT TODAY,
NOTHING WILL BE ORDINARY FOR
SCULPTOR ALBERT PALEY. TODAY
IS INSTALLATION DAY FOR
GENESEE PASSAGE, THE MOST
AMBITIOUS CREATION OF PALEY'S
CAREER. ALBERT PALEY, HIS
STUDIO STAFF AND A DOZEN SUB
CONTRACTORS HAVE LABORED FOR
MORE THAN FOUR YEARS TO BRING
GENESEE PASSAGE TO THIS POINT.
THERE ARE ONLY A FEW MORE
MILES IN THE JOURNEY AND A FEW
FINAL HOURS TO RAISE THE
SCULPTURE INTO PLACE AND THEY
WON'T BE EASY. GENESEE PASSAGE
IS THE CULMINATION OF HUNDREDS
OF DRAWINGS AND DESIGNS,
MEETINGS WITH CORPORATE
OFFICIALS, CONSULTANTS,
ARCHITECTS AND STRUCTURAL
ENGINEERS AND CUTTING,
BENDING, WELDING AND GRINDING
MASSIVE STEEL PLATES. NOW THE
SCULPTURE TRAVELS IN A FLATBED
TRUCK TO ITS FINAL
DESTINATION. THE ENTRANCE TO
BAUSCH  and  LOMB CORPORATIONS NEW
HEADQUARTERS BUILDING. THE
TRUCK CROSSES THE GENESEE
RIVER, WHICH CUTS THE CITY OF
ROCHESTER IN TWO, AND 40 TONS
OF STEEL, 65 FEET IN LENGTH
WILL SOON STAND IN CELEBRATION
OF THE CORPORATION THAT
COMMISSIONED IT, THE CITY THAT
WILL MARVEL AT IT, AND THE
SCULPTOR WHO CREATED IT.
HAILED AS A VIRTUOSO OF DESIGN
AND TECHNIQUE, ALBERT PALEY'S
MEDIUM IS METAL. BEGINNING AS
A JEWELER WORKING WITH GOLD
AND SILVER AND NOW A MASTER OF
IRON AND STEEL. PALEY BLURS
THE BOUNDARY BETWEEN CRAFT AND
ART AND GENESEE PASSAGE MARKS
A MAJOR MILESTONE IN A BODY OF
WORK THAT CONTINUOUSLY
REINVENTS ITSELF. NEW SPEAKER:
IT'S THE FIRST TIME I'VE SEEN
IT UP. NEW SPEAKER: AND WHAT'S
YOUR FIRST IMPRESSION? (MUSIC)
NARRATOR: THE SECOND HALF OF
THE 20TH CENTURY HAS WITNESSED
THE RISE AND EBBING OF A MAJOR
MOVEMENT IN ART AND THAT IS
THE STUDIO CRAFT MOVEMENT. IT
SPRUNG UP IN AN ACADEMIC
CIRCUMSTANCE, IN OUR
INSTITUTIONS OF HIGHER
EDUCATION AFTER WORLD WAR II
WHICH WERE BEING FED THROUGH
THE GI BILL OF RIGHTS. WITH
MATURE PEOPLE THIS MOVEMENT
FLOWERED, WAS INCREDIBLY
POTENT, THERE WERE HUNDREDS OF
PEOPLE MAKING WONDERFUL
CERAMICS, GLASS, METAL WORK,
WOODWORK AND AS THE MOVEMENT
EBBED THOSE MAJOR TALENTS
CONTINUED STRONG AND ONE OF
THOSE IS ALBERT PALEY. THERE
HAVE BEEN A HANDFUL OF MASTERS
EMERGING FROM THE STUDIO CRAFT
MOVEMENT AND THAT'S HOW I SEE
ALBERT'S POSITION TODAY. HE IS
AN ARTIST IN HIS OWN RIGHT WHO
CAME TO THAT POSITION THROUGH
THE STUDIO CRAFT MOVEMENT. NEW
SPEAKER: HE DOES KNOW WHO HE
IS. LOOK AT THE PHOTOGRAPH OF
HIM SITTING ON THE BENCH. NOW
COME ON, IT'S AN AMAZING
INSIGHT, ISN'T IT? THERE IS
SUCH A KEEN AWARENESS OF THE
ARTIST IN RELATIONSHIP TO THE
WORK, OF THE WORK IN
RELATIONSHIP TO THE
ENVIRONMENT, THE ENVIRONMENT
IN RELATIONSHIP TO THE NAME OF
THAT MUSEUM. IT'S ALL THERE IN
THAT PHOTOGRAPH. IT IS A
FABULOUS PORTRAIT. IT'S RIGHT
OUT OF HOLLYWOOD! IT'S JUST A
MARVELOUS PORTRAIT AND THERE'S
NOTHING WRONG WITH THAT. IT
JUST ALLOWS YOU TO UNDERSTAND
HOW HE MAKES THIS TRANSITION
FROM NOT KNOWING, FROM
BEGINNING TO FIND HIMSELF
THROUGH THE EXPLORATIONS OF
HIS STUDENT YEARS TO THE FINAL
REALIZATIONS OF WHERE HIS
ARTISTIC BENT IS AND TO THE
KNOWLEDGE THAT THE MAN IS
INSEPARABLE FROM THE WORK AND
THAT THEY HAVE TO BE UNIFIED
TOGETHER FOR HISTORY. (MUSIC)
NEW SPEAKER: IN 1990, BAUSCH  and
LOMB BEGAN PLANNING A NEW
CORPORATE HEADQUARTERS. BAUSCH
and  LOMB WANTED A BUILDING THAT
WOULD HONOR ITS 150-YEAR
PRESENCE IN THE CITY OF
ROCHESTER. NEW SPEAKER: IN
1992 THEY CALLED US UP AND
SAID THEY WERE READY TO GO AND
WANTED US TO MAKE A
PRESENTATION WHICH WE DID IN
ROCHESTER TO ALL THE
EXECUTIVES COMPETING WITH MOST
OF THE TOP FIRMS HERE IN THE
NORTHEAST AND THEY SELECTED
US. NARRATOR: CORPORATE
OFFICIALS CHALLENGED
ARCHITECTS TO CREATE A
WORLD-CLASS STRUCTURE; AN
URBAN PLACE WITH A SENSE OF
HISTORY AND PURPOSE FOR THE
FUTURE. THE SOLUTION WAS A
EUROPEAN STYLE COURTYARD WITH
A TRAFFIC CIRCLE SHOWCASING AN
IMPOSING ENTRANCE TO AN
IMPRESSIVE STONE TOWER. NEW
SPEAKER: SO WITHIN THIS
COURTYARD WE THEN HAD A WHOLE
PERFECT SETTING FOR A
BEAUTIFUL PIECE OF ARTWORK.
NEW SPEAKER: THE ART COMMITTEE
INTERVIEWED OVER A DOZEN
ARTISTS JUST FOR THAT SPACE,
FOR THE ELLIPSE OUTSIDE THE
BUILDING. WHAT WE REALLY
WANTED TO HAVE IN THAT SPACE
WAS SOMETHING THAT REALLY
SPOKE ABOUT BAUSCH  and  LOMB'S
BEGINNINGS AND WE FELT THAT
ALBERT PALEY WAS THE RIGHT
ARTIST BECAUSE HE'S A
WONDERFUL ARTIST BUT HE ALSO
UNDERSTANDS THE COMMUNITY AND
BAUSCH  and  LOMB. NEW SPEAKER:
OUR FIRST MEETING WITH ALBERT
WAS VERY EXCITING. HE HAS THIS
INSATIABLE APPETITE TO DESIGN
AS WE DO AS ARCHITECTS AND YOU
COULD SEE HE WAS JUST CHOMPING
AT THE BIT TO GET STARTED AND
REALLY GET INTO THIS PIECE.
NEW SPEAKER: IN ORDER FOR THE
SCULPTURE TO REALLY WORK IT
HAS TO BE APPROPRIATE TO THE
SITE: THE SCALE, THE
PROPORTION, THE AMBIANCE OF
THE WORK, ANY TYPE OF SPECIFIC
SYMBOLISM ADDRESSING THE SITE.
NEW SPEAKER: WE TALKED A
LITTLE BIT ABOUT HOW IT SHOULD
SOMEHOW REPRESENT THE HISTORY
OF BAUSCH  and  LOMB'S PRESENCE IN
THE CITY, IT SHOULD CONVEY THE
HERITAGE OF THE CITY IN SOME
FORM, IT SHOULD ALSO HAVE A
CELEBRATORY CHARACTER,
SOMETHING THAT IS REALLY
BURSTING WITH ENERGY AND
EXCITEMENT AND SOMETHING WHICH
SHOULD BE AT LEAST 40 FEET
HIGH. NEW SPEAKER: IN THINKING
ABOUT THE TIMELESS NATURE THAT
BAUSCH  and  LOMB WAS SEEKING FOR
IDENTITY WITH THE BUILDING, I
STARTED THINKING OF SYMBOLS OR
IMAGES THAT MIGHT CONVEY THAT
SENSE. NEW SPEAKER: THE
SYMBOLISM THAT HE HAD THOUGHT
THROUGH WAS WONDERFUL, THE
IDEA OF THE CEREMONIAL COLUMN,
WHICH WAS KIND OF FRAGMENTED,
DISJOINTED, AND THEN THE IDEA
OF THE RIVER SNEAKING THROUGH
AND FORMING A GATEWAY AND THEN
HE THREW THE RINGS AROUND THE
TOP THAT CONVEYED THE
CONTINUUM OF THE CORPORATION
AND ITS CONNECTION WITH THE
CITY AND THEN ULTIMATELY THIS
BURST OF RIBBONS WHICH OF
COURSE HE'S SO FAMOUS FOR AND
WHAT'S GOING TO MAKE IT SO
EXCITING. NEW SPEAKER: ALBERT
PALEY MANAGES ONE OF THE
LARGEST STUDIOS IN AMERICA,
PERHAPS IN THE WORLD. SPREAD
OUT OVER 22,000 SQUARE FEET,
IT'S MORE LIKE A FACTORY THAN
ARTIST'S STUDIO. AT ANY GIVEN
TIME THE PALEY STUDIO EMPLOYS
UP TO 10 HIGHLY TRAINED
ARTISANS. BUT UNLIKE A FACTORY
WITH ASSEMBLY LINE PRODUCTS,
PALEY MAKES ART. NEW SPEAKER:
WE DO CLOSE TO 100 ART
PROPOSALS A YEAR, BUT IT'S NOT
JUST THE PROPOSALS THAT
HAPPEN. THERE'S CONTRACTED
WORK FOR PRIVATE INDIVIDUALS,
THERE'S CONTRACTED WORK FOR
MAJOR CORPORATIONS, THERE ARE
EXHIBITIONS, THERE ARE
PUBLICATIONS. ALBERT HAS HIS
FINGER IN SO MANY PIES AND
HE'S ALSO SIMULTANEOUSLY
TRYING TO PRODUCE DECORATIVE
ARTS, ARCHITECTURAL METALWORK
AND SCULPTURE. HERE AT THE
STUDIO WE HAVE THOSE WHO WORK
IN THE OFFICE, THERE'S A
MANAGING DIRECTOR, AN
ADMINISTRATIVE ASSISTANT AND
AN ARCHIVIST. THEN ON THE
FLOOR WE HAVE THE SHOP MANAGER
AND THEN THE FOLKS WHO WORK ON
THE FLOOR WHO ACTUALLY MAKE
THE PIECES WITH ALBERT. ALBERT
KIND OF INTERACTS BETWEEN BOTH
THE OFFICE AND THE STUDIO BUT
THE THING THAT'S NEAT ABOUT
THIS PLACE IS THAT EVERYONE
CAN CROSS OVER INTO OTHER
JOBS. MOST PEOPLE HERE HAVE A
SPECIALTY THAT THEY'RE
PARTICULARLY GOOD AT BUT THEY
DON'T JUST TIE THEM TO THAT
PARTICULAR JOB AND IN A CRUNCH
SITUATION WHEN WE'RE SORT OF
BEHIND A DEADLINE, THE OFFICE
STAFF HAS BEEN KNOWN TO GO
DOWN ON THE FLOOR AND ASSIST
HELP FINISH A PIECE AND PACK
IT AND WRAP IT. NEW SPEAKER:
ONE OF THE BIG SUPPORT
FUNCTIONS HERE FOR ME AND
ALBERT AND FOR ALL OF US, WITH
THE SUBCONTRACTORS, THE CREW
ON THE FLOOR AND IN THE
OFFICE, WE ALL WORK AS A TEAM,
EVERYBODY. WE ALL DEPEND ON
EACH OTHER SO MANY TIMES
THROUGHOUT THE DAY. WE'RE A
SMALL CREW; WE WORK WITH VERY
HEAVY, DANGEROUS THINGS AND WE
NEED THE SUPPORT OF ONE
ANOTHER IN ORDER TO JUST GET
THROUGH THE DAY WITHOUT
GETTING HURT. I CAN'T SAY
ENOUGH ABOUT THE PEOPLE THAT
WORK HERE AT THE STUDIO.
NARRATOR: THE ARCHIVIST'S MANY
DUTIES INCLUDE UPDATING THE
GROWING PALEY RESUME,
CURRENTLY RUNNING AT 75 PAGES,
AND TRACKING THE PALEY
CATALOGUE, NOW NUMBERING MORE
THAN 10,000 OBJECTS. DAY IN
AND DAY OUT, PALEY IS
ENGROSSED IN THE ENTERPRISE
AND THE BUSINESS OF ART. IF
HE'S NOT PHYSICALLY ON THE
STUDIO FLOOR MAKING ART OR IN
THE OFFICE ON THE PHONE OR
ENGAGED IN A MEETING, HE'S ON
THE ROAD AND WHEN HE'S ON THE
ROAD, PALEY IS PLANNING,
SELLING AND INSTALLING HIS
ART. SOMETIMES HE RETURNS TO
VISIT AN INSTALLED WORK.
PASSAGE IS IN ASHEVILLE, NORTH
CAROLINA. THE PIECE IS 37 FEET
HIGH, WEIGHS 20 TONS, AND
UNTIL THE BAUSCH  and  LOMB
COMMISSION, WAS PALEY'S
LARGEST STEEL SCULPTURE. PALEY
HAS RECEIVED MANY AWARDS FOR
HIS WORK AND LECTURES IN
AMERICA AND ABROAD. (APPLAUSE)
PALEY: THANK YOU VERY MUCH. WE
WENT A LITTLE BIT OVER BUT
WITH SUCH A GREAT RESPONSE AND
A GREAT AUDIENCE, I'D LIKE TO
BE ABLE TO ANSWER ANY
QUESTIONS THAT ANY OF YOU
MIGHT HAVE. NEW SPEAKER: HOW
IS THE BAUSCH  and  LOMB PIECE
DOING AND ARE YOU HAPPY WITH
IT? PALEY: IT'S THE BEST THING
I EVER DID! (LAUGHTER AND
APPLAUSE)
(MUSIC) NARRATOR: ALBERT
RAYMOND PALEY, JUNIOR WAS BORN
IN PHILADELPHIA TO A WORKING
CLASS FAMILY WITH NO FORMAL
ART BACKGROUND, YET ART WAS
THE ONE THING THAT INTERESTED
HIM IN SCHOOL. TAKING A CHANCE
ON THE FUTURE, PALEY ENROLLED
AT THE TYLER SCHOOL OF ART OF
TEMPLE UNIVERSITY IN
PHILADELPHIA. NEW SPEAKER: HE
WAS JUST A NAME, JUST ANOTHER
YOUNG STUDENT AND ONLY AFTER
WORKING WITH HIM FOR A
SEMESTER DID I BECOME AWARE
THAT HE WAS UNIQUE AND HE HAS
DEMONSTRATED THAT UNIQUENESS
THROUGHOUT THE COURSE OF HIS
CAREER. WHEN HE ENTERED MY
CLASS, I BELIEVE HE THOUGHT OF
HIMSELF AS A SCULPTOR AND HE
SURPRISED HIMSELF I THINK
ABOUT HOW EXCITED HE BECAME TO
MAKE JEWELRY AND HOW REWARDING
THAT WAS TO HIM AT THAT POINT
IN HIS LIFE. NARRATOR: AFTER
GRADATION, PALEY WAS TORN
BETWEEN SCULPTURE AND
GOLDSMITHING. HE YIELDED TO
THE PASSION OF METALWORKING
AND STAYED AT TYLER. NEW
SPEAKER: HE HAD NO INTEREST IN
JEWELRY PRIOR TO PICKING UP
THOSE TOOLS IN MY CLASSROOM
AND THEREFORE HE APPROACHED IT
IN A VERY FRESH AND INVENTIVE
MANNER. THE CONCEPTS WERE
FRESH; THE SCALE WAS
UNINHIBITED, THE
DIMENSIONALITY WAS IMPORTANT,
ALL OF THE SKILLS THAT HE
BROUGHT TO BEAR AS AN
EXCEPTIONAL YOUNG ARTIST WERE
BROUGHT TO BEAR WITHOUT HIS
BEING CONDITIONED BY THE
HISTORY OF BODY ADORNMENT.
NARRATOR: IN THE LATE 1960'S,
PALEY'S WORK WAS AS
REVOLUTIONARY AS THE ERA IN
WHICH IT WAS MADE. HIS
JEWELRY, WITH A SENSE OF
SCULPTURE FOR THE FEMALE BODY,
WAS BOLD AND FRESH AND
RESONATED WITH THE SOCIAL
MOVEMENTS OF THE TIME. NEW
SPEAKER: MY WORK WAS
DEVELOPING AT THE SAME TIME
THAT HIS WAS AND I THINK WE
BOTH FOUND THAT TO BE VERY
STIMULATING. IT WAS A VERY
STIMULATING TIME IN
PHILADELPHIA, BESIDES. IT
AFFECTED ALBERT, IT AFFECTED
ME, AND IT AFFECTED EVERYONE
IN THE CRAFTS AT THAT TIME.
NEW PEOPLE WERE COMING INTO
THE AREA AND THE CRAFTS
COMMUNITY WAS FORMING IN
PHILADELPHIA AND IT WAS A VERY
EXCITING TIME FOR ALL OF US.
NEW SPEAKER: THE CRAFT WORLD
HAS ALWAYS BEEN A VERY SPECIAL
SUBSET OF THE ART WORLD AND IT
HAS A VERY STRONG AFFECTION
FOR ITS OWN TRADITIONS SO WHEN
ALBERT PALEY BEGAN TO EXHIBIT
THESE PIECES OF JEWELRY, THERE
WAS A PRETTY STRONG REACTION
AGAINST THEM. THEY SEEMED
ALMOST TO BETRAY SOME OF THE
ACCEPTED CONVENTIONS OF THE
PAST. IT WAS AS IF HE WERE
SOMEHOW PROMOTING HIMSELF IN
TOO LARGE A WAY FOR THE FORMAT
HE HAD CHOSEN. I THINK IT WAS
NOT TERRIBLY POPULAR WITH A
LOT OF JEWELRY
TRADITIONALISTS. ON THE OTHER
HAND, THERE WAS AN EMERGING
NEW ATTITUDE TOWARDS THE
CRAFTS. SOME OF THE IMPORTANT
DEALERS AT THE TIME RECOGNIZED
HIS GENIUS. I THINK OF SOMEONE
LIKE HELEN DRUTT IN
PHILADELPHIA WHO SAW VERY
CLEARLY THAT THIS WAS THE
BEGINNING OF A NEW DYNAMIC.
NEW SPEAKER: THE REAL MOMENT
THAT I REMEMBER WAS WHEN I SAW
THE DOUBLE FIBULA DURING HIS
MFA EXHIBITION AT THE
PHILADELPHIA ART ALLIANCE. I
SEE IT TODAY AS VIVIDLY AS I
SAW IT THEN AND I REMEMBER
THAT PIECE AND WANTING THAT
PIECE AND EVENTUALLY I
ACQUIRED THAT PIECE. PALEY:
WHAT I WANTED TO DO WAS
SOMETHING SIGNIFICANT;
SOMETHING THAT MADE A
STATEMENT AT A GIVEN POINT IN
TIME, THAT CREATED A
PERCEPTION OR AN UNDERSTANDING
ABOUT A REALITY THAT HADN'T
BEEN THERE BEFORE. SO ALL OF
THE WORK KIND OF POSTURED
ITSELF TOWARDS MORE OF A
SYMBOLIC CONTEXT AND BECAUSE
OF THAT THE PIECES HAD A
TENDENCY TO BE QUITE
ELABORATE, KIND OF
OVERSTATEMENTS, AND REALLY
TAKING ON THE PROBLEMS THAT
WERE BEING DEALT WITH AT THE
TIME. SO I TRIED TO TAKE THAT
TO THE EXTREME AND MAKE THE
MOST DRAMATIC STATEMENT AS
POSSIBLE. I'VE ALWAYS
GRAVITATED TOWARDS CHALLENGES
LIKE THAT. (MUSIC)
NEW SPEAKER: HOPE MACHLER, WHO
REPRESENTED LOUISE NEVELSON IN
PHILADELPHIA, CALLED ME ONE
DAY AND SAID THAT LOUISE WAS
GOING TO BE IN THE CITY AND
THEY WERE GOING TO BE HAVING
LUNCH AT THE BARCLAY AND WOULD
I LIKE TO COME AND JOIN THEM
AND WEAR AN IMPORTANT PIECE OF
JEWELRY; "WHY DON'T YOU WEAR A
PALEY?" AND I SELECTED THE
DELRIN NECKLACE, WHICH HAS THE
DELRIN BEADS AND THE LARGE,
ROUND DELRIN DISK WITH THIS
HUGE COPPER FORGED ELEMENT
THAT COMES OUT OF IT, ALMOST
LIKE AN ELEPHANT TRUNK. I
REMEMBER WALKING INTO THE
BARCLAY, BEING INTRODUCED TO
LOUISE NEVELSON AND SHE JUST
BECAME TOTALLY SILENT. I MEAN
SHE WAS REALLY UPSET THAT THE
WORK THAT I HAD ON WAS A
CHALLENGING WORK OF ART AND
THERE COULD NOT BE ANY OTHER
OBJECT THAT COULD HAVE THAT
KIND OF DOMINANT VISIBILITY.
NARRATOR: IN 1969, PALEY AND
LECHTZIN BUILT A BLACKSMITH'S
SHOP IN LECHTZIN'S GARAGE TO
INVESTIGATE THE PLASTIC NATURE
OF METAL. UNLIKE COLD FORGING,
WHICH IS USED IN THE PRECIOUS
METALS OF JEWELRY, THE HOT
FORGING PROCESS OF IRON
FASCINATED PALEY. NEW SPEAKER:
AS I HAVE THE STORY ABOUT
ALBERT AND THE BOOKS ON
IRONWORK IN THE LIBRARY, AT
TYLER WHEN HE WAS STARTING
THERE, HE AND HIS PROFESSOR -
AS HE BECAME INCREASINGLY
INTERESTED IN WORKING ON A
LARGE SCALE - WENT TO CHECK
OUT WHAT MATERIAL THERE WAS
AND THEY FOUND SOME EXTREMELY
ANCIENT BOOKS WHICH WENT BACK
TO THE ARTS AND CRAFTS
REVIVAL, NONE OF WHICH HAD
ACTUALLY BEEN BORROWED SINCE
1912. NEW SPEAKER: THERE WAS A
WHOLE TIME WARP THAT HAPPENED
THERE BUT ALSO WE WERE BOTH
VERY, VERY DRAWN TO IT BECAUSE
OF THIS WHOLE THING OF
INVESTIGATION IN PLASTICITY,
YET THE VALUE CONSTRUCT OR THE
SOCIAL CONTEXT WAS TOTALLY
DIFFERENT. SO THE QUESTION WAS
HOW CAN YOU BRING THIS KIND OF
ARCHAIC FORM VOCABULARY AND
PROCESS INTO A CONTEMPORARY
SENSIBILITY. NEW SPEAKER:
ALBERT HAD THE GOOD FORTUNE OF
COMING ALONG AT A POINT WHERE
HIS DISCIPLINE WAS EVOLVING
AND WAS BEING DEFINED AND HE
IS ONE MAJOR CONTRIBUTOR TO
COMPLETING THAT DEFINITION.
NEW SPEAKER: HE DID BELONG TO
PRECISELY THE RIGHT
GENERATION. TO SEIZE UPON, TO
RE-KNIT THE LINK BETWEEN THE
VERNACULAR AND THE ELITIST AND
TO MAKE SOMETHING ENTIRELY NEW
OUT OF IT. (MUSIC) NARRATOR:
GENESEE PASSAGE IS MADE
ENTIRELY FROM STEEL PLATES,
FLAME CUT TO PALEY'S
SPECIFICATIONS WHEN FED INTO
THE TORCH CUTTING TABLE'S
COMPUTER. EACH PIECE IS COLD
FORMED BY STAFF OR
SUBCONTRACTORS, WELDED
TOGETHER AND GROUND TO A
SMOOTH FINISH. THE PLATES, IN
VARYING THICKNESS, ARE MADE
FROM WHAT'S CALLED "WEATHERING
STEEL" OR "CORE TEN", A COMMON
TRADE NAME AND ONE OF PALEY'S
FAVORITE METALS. NEW SPEAKER:
WITH WEATHERING STEEL IN THE
ALLOY, YOU HAVE COPPER AND
NICKEL SO WHAT HAPPENS IN THE
EARLIER PHASES, THE FIRST
COUPLE OF YEARS, YOU WILL HAVE
THE RUNOFF OF THE IRON OXIDE.
THEN WHAT IS LEFT THEN IS A
VERY THIN RESIDUE OF COPPER
AND NICKEL, WHICH IS A
SELF-HEALING STEEL. NEW
SPEAKER: ONCE HE CAME UP WITH
THAT IDEA, ABSOLUTELY THE WAY
TO GO AND OF COURSE WE THINK
OF ALBERT AS BEING AN ARTIST
BUT HE IS ALSO A PHENOMENAL
TECHNICIAN AND THE WORK THAT
WENT INTO FIRST OF ALL THE
STRUCTURE OF THIS PIECE, WHICH
IS NOT 40 FEET HIGH BUT 65
FEET HIGH, IS IN ITSELF A WORK
OF ART AND THERE'S A LOT OF
HIDDEN PLATES AND THINGS WHICH
YOU DON'T SEE IN THE ULTIMATE
SCULPTURE BUT ARE INTERNAL
WHICH KEEP THIS FROM BLOWING
OVER, BUT ALL OF THIS HAS TO
BE DESIGNED IN A WAY THAT
WATER CAN DRAIN THROUGH IT
BECAUSE CORE TEN STEEL WILL
CONTINUE TO RUST AND OXIDIZE
IF IT TRAPS WATER. NEW
SPEAKER: SO EVERY PLACE
THERE'S A SEAM IN THE METAL,
IT IS TOTALLY WELDED AND
TOTALLY GROUND. ANYPLACE THAT
MIGHT PUDDLE WATER IS ANGLED
SO THAT THE WATER WILL WASH
OFF. ALSO, IT HAS TO BE ABLE
TO BREATHE, SO THESE WHICH
APPEAR TO BE SOLID FORMS ARE
IN FACT HOLLOW AND THERE ARE
VENTS AT THE TOP AND BOTTOM SO
THAT THE AIR WITH THE HEATING
OF THE STEEL ON THE SURFACE
CREATES AN UPDRAFT SO THESE
BECOME ACTUALLY LIKE LARGE
CHIMNEYS THAT TOTALLY
VENTILATE THE PIECE TO TAKE
OUT WATER VAPOR. NEW SPEAKER:
ALBERT'S RECURRING NIGHTMARE
IS THAT A WELD BREAKS AND
SOMEBODY GETS HURT. USUALLY MY
RECURRING NIGHTMARE IS THAT
THROUGH RIGGING, SOMETHING
TOPPLES OVER AND DURING TIMES
OF STRESS THAT DREAM POPS UP.
ACCORDING TO MY WIFE, THAT
DREAM HAPPENS. WHEN SHE FINDS
ME UNDER THE BED PUSHING ON IT
IN THE MIDDLE OF THE NIGHT,
SHE KNOWS THAT I'M HAVING A
WORK DREAM. NARRATOR: PALEY
LEFT PHILADELPHIA IN 1969 TO
TAKE A TEACHING POSITION AT
THE ROCHESTER INSTITUTE OF
TECHNOLOGY. HE CONTINUED TO
MAKE JEWELRY AND IRONWORK.
THREE YEARS LATER THE
SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION
INVITED HIM TO COMPETE FOR A
COMMISSION TO CREATE A PAIR OF
GATES FOR THE NEW RENWICK
MUSEUM. THE SMITHSONIAN WANTED
TO DRAW ATTENTION TO CRAFTS
AND THE DECORATIVE ARTS WITH
ITS FIRST MAJOR COMMISSION,
THE RENWICK GATES. NEW
SPEAKER: IN SELECTING ALBERT
PALEY, WHO DID NOT HAVE A
TRACK RECORD IN ARCHITECTURAL
WORK, WHO HAD A FINE TRADITION
AS A JEWELER BUT NOT IN THIS
LARGER FORMAT, IT CERTAINLY
WAS A BOLD DECISION. ON THE
OTHER HAND IT WAS BASED ON
DRAWINGS AND DESIGNS, IT WAS
BASED ON ENOUGH EVIDENCE TO
HAVE CONFIDENCE THAT HE WOULD
DO A WONDERFUL PIECE. I GUESS
I LIKEN IT A LITTLE BIT TO THE
DECISION THAT WAS MADE TO GIVE
THE COMPETITION FOR THE
VIETNAM MEMORIAL TO MIA LIN,
WHO AGAIN HAD NO TRACK RECORD,
NO REAL EXPERIENCE, BUT ENOUGH
IN HER SUBMISSION TO SHOW THAT
SHE WAS READY FOR THE
CHALLENGE. NEW SPEAKER: SO I
DON'T KNOW WHAT KIND OF A RISK
THE PEOPLE WHO GRANTED THE
COMMISSION BUT THEY CERTAINLY
DIDN'T EXPECT TO GET THE
POWERHOUSE THAT THEY GOT. THE
PORTAL GATES FOR THE RENWICK
ARE A DEFINITE STAGE OF THE
DEVELOPMENT OF ARCHITECTURAL
IRONWORK IN THE WESTERN
TRADITION. THEY SUM UP A LOT
OF THE IDEAS THAT WERE
EXPRESSED IN EARLIER WORKS AND
WHICH ALBERT KNOWS, EITHER
FROM REPRODUCTION OR FIRST
HAND BECAUSE THESE PIECES ARE
QUITE FAMOUS. ALBERT TRIES IN
THE PORTAL GATES TO NOT ONLY
ADAPT IDEAS - THE DECORATIVE
SCROLLS, THE SENSE OF VARYING
THE SIZE OF THE SCROLLS, THE
ENERGY AND THE MOVEMENT OF THE
SCROLLS, THIS LACINESS WHICH
IS TRANSFORMED INTO A MORE
MUSCULAR KIND OF DECORATION -
TO MOVE BEYOND THE IDEAS THAT
WERE EMBODIEDIN SOME OF THESE
EARLIER WORKS, SUCH AS THE
DOORS FOR THE CHATEAU DE
MAISON IN THE 17TH CENTURY,
WHICH ARE IN THE LOUVRE. SO IT
REPRESENTS A POINT OF
DEPARTURE A STAGE FOR HIM TO
THEN DEPART FOR HIS LATER
WORK. I THINK IT'S MORE
IMPORTANT TO SEE IT THAT WAY
THAN AS AN ENDING; IT'S REALLY
A BEGINNING FOR HIM, EVEN
THOUGH IT'S A FINISHED
STATEMENT AND IT'S A VERY
ELABORATE FINISHED STATEMENT -
IT INCORPORATES SEVERAL
METALS, IT'S WAVY, IT'S WILD
BUT IT'S A CONTROLLED ENERGY,
IT'S A CONTROLLED WILDNESS OF
SOMETHING WHICH ALL THE
BLACKSMITHS HAD TO DEAL WITH,
WHETHER THEY WERE WORKING IN
THE 12TH CENTURY OR THE EARLY
20TH CENTURY. NEW SPEAKER: IT
DEMONSTRATED THAT HE WAS
CAPABLE OF MAKING WORK ON A
LARGE SCALE OF THE HIGHEST
QUALITY AND IT DEMONSTRATED
THIS IN A PARTICULARLY
SENSITIVE SITE, THAT IS IN A
WELL ESTABLISHED GOVERNMENT
INSTITUTION EASILY AVAILABLE
TO THE PUBLIC IN THE NATION'S
CAPITAL. SUDDENLY HERE WAS
THIS GUY, HARDLY KNOWN, WHO
GETS UP THIS MONUMENTAL THING
AND EVERYBODY IS FORCED TO
AGREE THAT EVEN IF YOU LOOK
AROUND YOU, WHETHER YOU LIKED
IT OR NOT, THE QUALITY OF THE
WORKMANSHIP IS FULLY EQUAL TO
ANYTHING THAT HAS BEEN
PRODUCED IN AMERICA IN THE
PAST AND IN MANY WAYS SHOWS A
MORE INVENTIVE APPROACH TO A
TRADITIONAL MATERIAL. BUT IT
WAS SO FULL OF ENERGY, SO FULL
OF LIFE, SO TO SPEAK, THAT
PEOPLE WHO HAD BEEN VIOLENTLY
OPPOSED TO ORNAMENT SUDDENLY
FOUND THEIR RESISTANCE
CRUMBLING, THAT IT SUDDENLY
SEEMED THAT IT WOULD BE
POSSIBLE TO INVENT A
VOCABULARY OF ORNAMENT FOR THE
SECOND HALF OF THE 20TH
CENTURY. NARRATOR: THE RENWICK
GATES TOOK PALEY A YEAR TO
CREATE. FABRICATING THE GATES
MEANT EXPANDING HIS STUDIO,
PURCHASING NEW EQUIPMENT AND
HIRING HIS FIRST EMPLOYEE.
SHORTLY BEFORE THE GATES WERE
COMPLETED, WHILE MOTORCYCLING
HOME FOR THE EVENING, PALEY
HAD A SERIOUS ACCIDENT. PALEY:
I WAS TOLD THAT BECAUSE OF THE
INTERNAL INJURIES I WAS GOING
TO DIE. AND UH, RIGHT AFTER I
WAS TOLD THAT MY APPRENTICE
WAS THERE AND IT WAS QUITE AN
EMOTIONAL TIME AND THE REALITY
THAT I WAS EXPERIENCING, THAT
LIFE AS I KNEW IT WAS GOING TO
BE GONE, AND I HAD X AMOUNT OF
TIME AND WHAT WAS I GOING TO
DO WITH IT? THE THING THAT WAS
CONSTANTLY ON MY MIND WAS TO
FINISH THE GATES. SO I HAD
RICHARD PALMER, WHO WAS MY
ASSISTANT AT THE TIME, GET ME
A SKETCHBOOK AND I JUST
CONTINUED TO DRAW DETAILS OF
THE RESOLUTION OF THE GATES
AND SO IF I WERE TO DIE THIS
WOULD BE THE RESOLUTION OF
THAT. (MUSIC) NARRATOR: DURING
THE AMERICAN CRAFT REVIVAL OF
THE 1970'S AND 80'S, ALBERT
PALEY BECAME THE LEADING
SCULPTOR OF METAL. WITH A
CONSTANT NEED FOR NEW
CHALLENGES, PALEY TURNED TO
THE DECORATIVE ARTS. LIKE HIS
EARLIER WORK, PALEY'S
FURNITURE IS IN AN EMOTIONAL
RESPONSE TO ORGANIC FORM. NEW
SPEAKER: I FIRST KNEW ALBERT
PALEY'S WORK WHEN I WAS A
CURATOR OF DECORATIVE ARTS AT
THE METROPOLITAN MUSEUM AND I
WAS DEALING WITH THE FORMULAS
OF CHAIRS, TABLES, HARDWARE AS
THEY HAD BEEN EXPRESSED
THROUGH THE CENTURIES. WELL I
FOUND ALBERT'S WORK IN THE
SO-CALLED "DECORATIVE ARTS",
TO BE THE PERFECT COUNTERPART
TO THESE PREDECESSORS. WORK OF
INCREDIBLE AESTHETIC POWER
THAT ALSO FUNCTIONS. A TABLE
YOU CAN USE BUT WHICH ALSO
MAKES A VISUAL AND TACTILE
IMPRESSION ON YOU THAT YOU
NEVER FORGET. SO YOU HAVE USED
IT BUT IT HAS IMPRESSED ITSELF
ON YOU AS AN ENTITY. THAT IS A
WORK OF DECORATIVE ARTS.
ALBERT'S WORK IN SUCH
FUNCTIONAL ELEMENTS CAN BE
SENSATIONAL. HE CREATED A
CONFERENCE TABLE THAT IF YOU
EVER SAT AT IN THE CONFERENCE
CIRCUMSTANCE, YOU WOULD BE
FOREVER CARRYING THE IMAGE AND
THE MOMENT WITH YOU. IT WAS A
HUGE CIRCLE OF GLASS, SLICED
BY JAGGED STEEL. IF YOU COULD
WORK IN THAT CIRCUMSTANCE, IF
YOU COULD HOLD YOUR OWN IN
THAT CONFERENCE, YOU WERE MADE
OF SOMETHING, SOMETHING
SPECIAL - THE "RIGHT STUFF"
AND THE CONFERENCE WOULD HAVE
BEEN DEFINED BY THAT TABLE.
THE CALIBER OF WHAT WENT ON IN
THE ENVIRONMENT WOULD HAVE
CORRESPONDED, WOULD HAVE HAD
TO CORRESPOND, TO THIS WORK OF
ART. THAT TO ME IS MAJOR
ACCOMPLISHMENT. NEW SPEAKER: I
THINK WHEN WE SIT DOWN AND
TALK ABOUT THE SCOPE OF THE
EXHIBITION AND THE THEME OF
THE EXHIBITION, THIS WILL ALL
FALL INTO PLACE. NARRATOR:
CRITICS AND CONNOISSEURS OFTEN
COMPARE PALEY'S WORK TO THE
ART NOUVEAU PERIOD OF THE
1920'S. REFUSING TO ENGAGE IN
THE DIALOGUE, PALEY HIMSELF
AVOIDS QUESTIONS ABOUT
CATEGORIZATION, INCLUDING THE
OLD ARGUMENT OF ART VERSUS
CRAFT. PALEY: IT JUST
REINFORCES ALL THAT
CATEGORIZATION. I THINK IT
OBSCURES WHAT THE REAL ISSUES
ARE. NEW SPEAKER: SAN
FRANCISCO, A COUPLE OF MONTHS
AGO, ARTISTS DESIGNING
MENORAHS, SO THIS IS THE
MENORAH I DESIGNED. NEW
SPEAKER: THIS IS THE DRAWING
OF IT THERE AS WELL. NEW
SPEAKER: IF YOU LOOK AT HIS
WORK, THE THING THAT IS SO
AMAZING ABOUT IT IS THAT THERE
IS THIS THREAD; YOU KNOW IT'S
HIS WORK. ONE PIECE LEADS TO
ANOTHER. YOU CAN SEE - YOU
LOOK AT A PIECE AND YOU KNOW
THAT IT'S HIS. PALEY: THESE
ARE SOME WRITING TABLES THAT
I'M DESIGNING. THIS IS GOING
TO BE ALL STAINED AND METALLIC
DUST RUBBED INTO THE GRAIN AND
THEN VARNISHED. NEW SPEAKER:
HIS WORK IS INTIMATELY
ORIGINAL. IT'S ORIGINAL IN
THAT IT IS SO INTIMATELY HIM.
PALEY: I PHYSICALLY WORK DOWN
HERE WITH THE GUYS ALL THE
TIME; I'M JUST DRESSED UP FOR
YOU. NEW SPEAKER: WE
APPRECIATE THAT (LAUGHING).
NEW SPEAKER: HE'S ALWAYS
WORKED ON THINGS THAT HAVE AN
INTIMATE INTEREST TO HIM SO IN
THAT THEY ARE ORIGINAL BECAUSE
HE ISN'T AFFECTED BY CURRENT
THINGS. IT JUST DOESN'T
HAPPEN. HE'S ON HIS OWN
WAVELENGTH AND HE STAYS ON IT.
NEW SPEAKER: WHAT IS
PARTICULAR TO ALBERT PALEY'S
ARTISTRY IS A LYRICISM THAT
COMES OUT OF THE MAN HIMSELF.
HE HAS DONE EVERYTHING
CONCEIVABLE TO COUNTERACT THAT
LYRICISM, SEEKING A CHALLENGE,
HARDER AND HARDER EACH TIME,
IN THE FORM OF MATERIALS,
TECHNIQUES, SILVER IS PLAINT,
GOLD MORE SO, WAS ALL TOO EASY
TO CREATE HIS WORKS OF ART. SO
HE TURNED TO THE MOST
RESISTANT METAL THERE IS -
CORE TEN STEEL AND THE STEEL
FOUGHT HIM AND HE FOUGHT BACK
AND OF COURSE THE LYRICISM
WON. HE ENDED UP TURNING STEEL
INTO WAVES AND WATERY EDDIES.
SO THEN HE GOT HIMSELF AN
ELEVATOR MOTOR AND STARTED
TWISTING THE STEEL SO IT
COULDN'T FLOW, TYING IT,
BALLING IT UP - AND WHAT
HAPPENED? HIS LYRICISM MADE
THAT BALLED UP TWISTED STEEL
TURN INTO ORGANIC VINES
TRIUMPHING OVER EACH OBSTACLE,
WORKING THEIR WAY THROUGH IN A
KIND OF INNER LIFE TO COME
BACK TO LYRICISM. HE CAN'T
DEFEAT IT; HE GOES AFTER SIZE,
HE GOES AFTER RESISTANCE, BUT
IT'S THE STRUGGLE THAT MAKES
THE GREATNESS. THAT'S THE
POWER OF PALEY'S WORK IS THE
CHALLENGES HE CHOOSES, THE
BATTLES THAT HE SETS OUT FOR
HIMSELF AND IT'S ALWAYS HIS
POETRY THAT WINS. (MUSIC)
NARRATOR: WHEN BAUSCH  and  LOMB
ASKED PALEY TO SUBMIT A
PROPOSAL FOR A WORK OF
SCULPTURE TO ENHANCE ITS NEW
BUILDING, GENESEE PASSAGE WAS
HIS SECOND DESIGN, NOT THE
FIRST. THE FIRST CONCEPT,
MIRAGE, WAS REJECTED. NEW
SPEAKER: THE FIRST PROPOSAL
WAS A SATIN STAINLESS STEEL
SCULPTURE THAT WAS GOING TO BE
ABOUT 75 FEET TALL THAT DEALT
WITH A VERY KIND OF RORSCHACH
SILHOUETTE AGAINST THE SKY AND
THE SURFACES WERE DESIGNED AS
SUCH THAT LIGHT WOULD REFLECT
OFF OF THE SURFACE. FOR MANY
REASONS THEY FELT THAT THAT
SCULPTURE WAS NOT APPROPRIATE
TO THE CORPORATE AMBIANCE OF
BAUSCH  and  LOMB. NEW SPEAKER: WE
DIDN'T LIKE THAT ONE AT ALL.
IT WAS TOO COLD AND STERILE
AND IT JUST DIDN'T APPEAL TO
ANYONE. PALEY: THEY WANTED
SOMETHING THAT HAD MORE OF A
TIMELESS QUALITY ABOUT IT;
SOMETHING THAT SPOKE OF THE
CONTINUANCE OF BAUSCH  and  LOMB
IN TIME AND THEY FELT THAT
THIS STATEMENT WAS FOR A
BETTER WAY TO SAY IT, KIND OF
TOO CONTEMPORARY FOR THE IMAGE
THAT THEY SOUGHT. NEW SPEAKER:
IT HAPPENS, BUT IT'S STILL
GOING TO LOOK LIKE A PALEY.
NEW SPEAKER: THE ACTUAL PIECE
IN THE SENSE OF THE PROGRESS
OF ALBERT'S WORK IS MORE
ADVANCED THAN THE BAUSCH  and
LOMB PIECE. IT'S MUCH MORE
CLEARLY THE DIRECTION HE'S
MOVING TOWARDS RATHER THAN THE
THING HE'S MOVING AWAY FROM.
NARRATOR: NEVER A STRANGER TO
CONTROVERSY, PALEY'S PREVIOUS
WORK PASSAGE, IN ASHEVILLE,
NORTH CAROLINA, GENERATED
CRITICISM, CONTENTION AND
CONFLICT. PASSAGE WAS A
FEDERAL COMMISSION AND ITS
INSTALLATION AROUSED THE
AESTHETIC LIONS. NEW SPEAKER:
THE CONTROVERSY SURROUNDING
THE PIECE WAS BASED MOSTLY IN
MISUNDERSTANDING. MOST PEOPLE
DID NOT KNOW WHAT SCULPTURE
WAS FOR AND DID NOT KNOW WHAT
PUBLIC SCULPTURE WAS FOR.
THERE WAS A LOT OF TO-DO ABOUT
HOW MUCH IT COST AND WHY IT
DIDN'T LOOK MORE LIKE A GUY ON
A HORSE. NEW SPEAKER: I THINK
IT'S GOOD FOR ASHEVILLE TO
HAVE A CONTROVERSY BECAUSE IT
RAISES THE AWARENESS OF ART.
(MUSIC)
NARRATOR: IN THE FALL
OF 1995, BAUSCH  and  LOMB
OFFICIALLY OPENED THE DOORS TO
ITS NEW HEADQUARTERS. THE
MEDIA AND THE PUBLIC WERE
INVITED TO VIEW THE BUILDING
AND THE MANY WORKS OF ART
PURCHASED OR COMMISSIONED BY
THE COMPANY. (APPLAUSE) ABSENT
FROM THE BUILDING EXTERIOR
HOWEVER, WAS GENESEE PASSAGE.
NEW SPEAKER: COMING THIS
SPRING, ALBERT PALEY WILL BE
INSTALLING HIS PUBLIC
SCULPTURE IN THE CIRCULAR
DRIVEWAY ADDING ARCHITECTURAL
VITALITY TO ROCHESTER'S URBAN
LANDSCAPE. ALBERT? NARRATOR:
NEARLY THREE YEARS INTO THE
PROCESS, THE SCULPTURE WAS
SERIOUSLY BEHIND SCHEDULE. IT
WOULD BE ANOTHER YEAR BEFORE
PALEY COMPLETED AND INSTALLED
GENESEE PASSAGE. IT WAS THE
FABRICATION OF THE SCULPTURE'S
MASSIVE ELEMENTS THAT TOOK SO
LONG TO COMPLETE. THESE WERE
THE SPLIT COLUMN PIECES, THE
RINGS AND THE LONG, WAVE-LIKE
FORMS CALLED "THE BACON
STRIPS" BY PALEY'S STAFF. THE
SQUAT, COUNTERPOINT PIECE TO
THE SOARING VERTICAL FORMS
KNOWN AS "THE DEBR", ALSO
REQUIRED METICULOUS WORK.
(FACTORY SOUNDS-LOUDSPEAKER)
PALEY: THE FINAL RESOLUTION
WAS THAT WE WOULD DO THE
SCULPTURE IN MODULAR SECTIONS;
DO WHAT WE COULD IN HOUSE HERE
AND THEN THOSE SECTIONS WERE
THEN SHIPPED TO ANOTHER SITE
WHERE WE LEASED INDUSTRIAL
SPACE AND THEN FABRICATED THE
TOTAL UNIT. THIS IS PRETTY
MUCH THE ORIENTATION WE HAVE
NOW, IT'S JUST LYING DOWN.
NARRATOR: THE FINAL DIFFICULT
ASSEMBLY OF THE SCULPTURE WAS
OVERSEEN BY PALEY'S ENGINEER
TO INSURE ITS STRUCTURAL
INTEGRITY. PALEY: THE HOOPS,
AS YOU'LL RECALL, ARE GOING TO
NESTLE IN LIKE THAT SO YOU'LL
HAVE A TWO-POINT CONTACT.
NARRATOR: THE TASK BECAME
CRITICAL WHEN PALEY DISCOVERED
IT WAS IMPOSSIBLE TO ASSEMBLE
THE SCULPTURE IN A VERTICAL
POSITION. HE WAS FORCED TO
CREATE THE 40-TON,
THREE-DIMENSIONAL VERTICAL
STEEL SCULPTURE WHILE IT WAS
LYING DOWN. PALEY DIDN'T KNOW
IF HIS AESTHETIC VISION WOULD
BE REALIZED UNTIL THE
SCULPTURE WAS ACTUALLY
INSTALLED. AS THE AMERICAN
ECONOMY BOOMED IN THE 1980'S,
ARCHITECTS OF MEANS TURNED TO
ORNAMENT. LONG OUT OF FASHION,
THE DECORATIVE ELEMENT WAS
ONCE AGAIN IN VOGUE AND
ARTIST/CRAFTSMAN ALBERT PALEY
WAS ONCE AGAIN IN THE RIGHT
PLACE AT THE RIGHT TIME. AS
WITH HIS FURNITURE, DEMAND FOR
HIS ARCHITECTURAL METALWORK
INCREASED. BY 1995, PALEY HAD
BECOME THE FIRST METAL
SCULPTOR IN THE HISTORY OF THE
AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF
ARCHITECTS TO RECEIVE
INSTITUTE HONORS. NEW SPEAKER:
THE PLEASURE IN WORKING WITH
ALBERT IS THROUGH HIS
UNDERSTANDING OF THE
RELATIONSHIP OF ART AND
ARCHITECTURE. ALBERT HAS THE
ABILITY TO MAKE SOMETHING THAT
IS IN FACT INTEGRAL; IT LOOKS
LIKE IT BELONGS THERE. HOW
DOES HE DO THAT? HE DOES THAT
BECAUSE HE HAS A SENSE OF WHAT
THE ARCHITECT IS DOING SO HE
HAS A GREAT UNDERSTANDING OF
WHAT ARCHITECTURE IS ABOUT AND
IT'S SPACE, IT'S FORM, IT'S
MATERIALS, IT'S ALL OF THOSE
THINGS COMBINED. HE'S LOOKED
AT ENOUGH BUILDINGS TO KNOW
HOW YOU MAKE THEM - WHAT'S
GENUINE OR AUTHENTIC ABOUT
THEM. I MET ALBERT BECAUSE OF
HIS PATIENCE AND MINE. WE WERE
BOTH SITTING ON THE SAME BENCH
WAITING TO GO SEE THE SAME
GROUP OF PEOPLE. IT WAS THE
PENNSYLVANIA AVENUE
DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION.
ALBERT HAD WON A COMPETITION
TO DESIGN SOME TREE GRATES
THAT WERE GOING TO BE USED
ALONG PENNSYLVANIA AVENUE. I
HAD WON THE COMPETITION FOR
THE CONSTRUCTION OF THE
WILLARD HOTEL SO SITTING NEXT
TO ALBERT I COULDN'T HELP BUT
SAY HELLO AND I SAID, "WHAT
ARE YOU DOING HERE?" HE SHOWED
ME HIS TREE GRATES AND I
SHOWED HIM MY WILLARD HOTEL
AND THAT'S HOW OUR
CONVERSATIONS BEGAN. THIS WAS
PROBABLY 20 YEARS AGO. I THINK
ARTISTS TODAY ARE IN A
DIFFICULT POSITION. THEY ARE
THE LAST TO BE INVITED TO THE
TABLE AND YOU NEED TO BE OF A
SPECIAL TEMPERAMENT AND
INTELLIGENCE TO BE ABLE TO
COME IN AT THAT LATE STAGE,
UNDERSTAND THE GIVENS OF THE
SITUATION AND THEN PRODUCE
SOMETHING THAT IS MEANINGFUL.
I THINK TOO FREQUENTLY WE SEE
THE RESULTS OF THAT AND
SOMETIMES THEY AREN'T
SATISFACTORY BUT IT'S ALBERT'S
DISPOSITION AND INTELLIGENCE
THAT ALLOW HIM TO COME IN LATE
IN THE PROJECT, STILL GET THE
SPIRIT OF IT AND BRING HIS OWN
ART AND CRAFT IN MAKING A
MEANINGFUL CONTRIBUTION.
NARRATOR: PALEY'S MOST
IMPRESSIVE COMMISSION OF THE
LATE 1980'S ARE HIS EIGHT
SCULPTURES FOR THE WORTHAM
THEATER CENTER IN HOUSTON,
TEXAS. HIS OBJECTIVE WAS TO
MAKE A CEREMONIAL STATEMENT
THAT WOULD COMPLEMENT THE
CENTER'S GRAND STAIRCASE.
PALEY'S SOLUTION BECAME FOUR
PAIRS OF SCULPTURES, EACH
RISING HIGHER IN STATURE AND
ELABORATION AS PATRONS ASCEND
A LONG ESCALATOR. NEW SPEAKER:
THE WORTHAM SCULPTURES ARE A
MAJOR WORK IN PALEY'S CAREER.
MY FEELING FROM THE PICTURES
I'VE SEEN IS THAT QUITE SIMPLY
HE DOES WHAT YOU WANT A
THEATER TO DO. THAT GOING TO A
THEATER IS BOTH A FESTIVE AND
IN A WAY A CEREMONIAL OCCASION
AND THESE OBJECTS GOING UP
ACTUALLY ARE CEREMONIOUS AS
WELL AS FESTIVE, THAT THEY
MAKE ENTERING INTO THE THEATER
A MATTER OF EVERYBODY TURNS
INTO HIS OR HER OWN
PROCESSION, SO TO SPEAK. THAT
SURELY IS A WONDERFUL TROPE;
IT'S A VERY CLEVER
METAPHORICAL IDEA. I DON'T
THINK THAT THESE FLAMBEAUS
EXIST AS INDIVIDUAL BITS OF
SCULPTURE. I THINK THAT THEY
HAVE TO BE SEEN AS A SERIES
AND THEY HAVE TO BE SEEN IN
CONJUNCTION WITH THE
ARCHITECTURE. (MUSIC) THE ROAD
OF A PUBLIC SCULPTOR, WHICH IS
WHAT PALEY HAS BECOME, IS A
PECULIARLY THORNY ONE. I THINK
THE HISTORY OF HIS COMMISSIONS
IS A VERY INTERESTING HISTORY
OF THE DEBATE WITHIN THE
UNITED STATES ABOUT WHAT THE
NATION IS SUPPOSED TO BE AND
THIS IN SPITE OF THE FACT THAT
IN THE MANNER OF OUR TIMES,
THESE MONUMENTS ARE
NON-SPECIFIC. NEW SPEAKER:
ALBERT'S INTENT I DON'T THINK
IS TO CHALLENGE, THROUGH HUMOR
OR THROUGH AGGRESSION. ALBERT
COMES OUT OF A TOTALLY
DIFFERENT DESIGN WORLD. HE'S
MORE I THINK INVOLVED IN
CREATING SOMETHING BEAUTIFUL
FOR A SPACE. THE PUBLIC IS NOT
JARRED BY IT; MOST COMMENTS
ARE THAT IT'S QUITE BEAUTIFUL.
HE HAS A TREMENDOUS SENSE OF
SCALE, OF MATERIAL, OF
APPROPRIATENESS, HIS WORK IS
METICULOUS AND THAT GOES BACK
I THINK TO HIS JEWELRY MAKING.
NO MATTER WHAT SCALE IT'S IN,
IT IS METICULOUSLY CONCEIVED
AND METICULOUSLY EXECUTED. HE
IS TOTALLY INVOLVED IN ITS
PLACEMENT, ITS SITING, ITS
LIGHTING, EVERYTHING TO DO
WITH THE WORK. IT IS A LARGE
JEWEL. NEW SPEAKER: PRAY TO
THE PHOTON GODS. ALBERT LIKES
TO STIR THINGS UP. I THINK
ALBERT WOULD LIKE YOU TO HATE
A PIECE OR DISLIKE A PIECE
INTENSELY THAN TO BE
INDIFFERENT TO IT AND I THINK
HE LIKES TO CHALLENGE PEOPLE'S
THINKING. IF IT'S A FUNCTIONAL
PIECE OF FURNITURE, FOR
EXAMPLE, THEN IT CAN ALSO BE A
BEAUTIFUL PIECE OF ART AT THE
SAME TIME. I THINK HE LIKES
CHALLENGING PEOPLE AS PART OF
WHAT HE CREATES FOR THE LARGE
PUBLIC SPACES. I THINK HE
WANTS PEOPLE TO REACT TO IT,
TO RESPOND TO IT, TO STOP AND
LOOK AT IT AND TO THINK ABOUT
IT. I THINK HE LIKES TO STIR
THINGS UP AND HIMSELF ALSO. I
THINK WHEN THINGS GET
COMPLACENT, I THINK HE LIKES
TO CHALLENGE IT AND BREAK THE
MOLD A LITTLE BIT. I'VE SEEN
HIM DO IT A NUMBER OF TIMES
AND HE'S DOING IT RIGHT NOW.
NARRATOR: THE MOST RECENT OF
PALEY'S PUBLIC SCULPTURES ARE
A SERIES OF MUSEUM PIECES
FIRST CREATED FOR THE TOLEDO
MUSEUM OF ART, FOLLOWED BY A
ONE-MAN EXHIBITION FOR THE
MUSEUM OF ART AT BRIGHAM YOUNG
UNIVERSITY. UNLIKE PALEY'S
EARLIER SCULPTURE WORK, THESE
PIECES CELEBRATE ASPECTS OF
CLASSICAL IMAGES. THE MOST
DIRECT INFLUENCE IS THE TOLEDO
MUSEUM'S 1954 MURAL BY
MATISSE, "APOLLO". (MUSIC) NEW
SPEAKER: THERE'S A SLY LOOK ON
ALBERT'S FACE AND I KNOW THE
LOOK, I KNOW WHAT HE'S SAYING
AND IT'S "WAIT UNTIL YOU SEE
THIS ONE" OR "WAIT UNTIL I
ATTEMPT TO DO THIS ONE" OR "I
DON'T KNOW HOW I'M GOING TO
SOLVE THIS PROBLEM, BUT I'M
GOING TO DO IT" AND HE LOVES
HAVING THAT CHALLENGE. (MUSIC)
NEW SPEAKER: THAT'S GOOD,
THAT'S GOOD. GET A GOOD WELD
UP HERE, AND THEN WE'LL PICK
UP ON THAT. IT SHOULD FLEX
ENOUGH. NEW SPEAKER: THE ONE
COMMON THING THAT NO ONE EVER
WANTED TO THINK ABOUT THROUGH
THIS ENTIRE PROCESS AND I
FOUGHT IT AS MUCH AS I TRIED
TO THINK ABOUT IT, I COULDN'T
WASTE TOO MUCH TIME ON IT
BECAUSE I KNEW ALBERT WASN'T
THINKING ABOUT IT, WAS THE
RIBBONS. THROUGH ALL THIS
PROCESS, THIS VERY
STRAIGHTFORWARD FABRICATION,
HOLLOW FORM FABRICATION OF THE
COLUMNS, THE RINGS, THE BACON
STRIPS, EVERYTHING'S HOLLOW.
THE THING THAT WASN'T THE SAME
WERE THE RIBBONS. AS MUCH AS I
WANTED TO KNOW HOW WE WERE
GOING TO MAKE THEM, WE DIDN'T
KNOW AND I'D LOOK AT ALBERT
AND SAY, "HOW ARE WE GOING TO
DO THIS?" AND HE SAID, "I
DON'T KNOW - WHAT DO YOU
THINK?" AND I SAID, "I DON'T
KNOW EITHER!" BUT IT'S
INTERESTING THAT ALL THIS
STRAIGHTFORWARD FABRICATION IS
GOING ON AND THERE WAS ONE
COMMON THING THAT NEITHER OF
US WANTED TO THINK ABOUT WERE
THESE RIBBONS. NARRATOR: THE
SOLUTION FOR CREATING SINUOUS
RIBBONS FROM RIGID STEEL WAS
INGENIOUS. PALEY MADE SMALL TO
SCALE BRASS MODELS, DRAWING
HASH MARKS ON THEM FROM ONE
END TO THE OTHER. HIS
SUBCONTRACTOR THEN USED
REFLECTED LIGHT ON THE HASH
MARKS TO REFERENCE THE BEND
POINTS ON THE STEEL PLATES.
THE RESULTS WERE EXACT
DUPLICATES OF THE SMALL
MODELS, BUT 20 FEET IN LENGTH
AND A HALF-INCH THICK. EACH
STEEL RIBBON WEIGHS ABOUT
THREE QUARTERS OF A TON. THE
NEXT TASK WAS TO LIFT AND WELD
THE RIBBONS INTO PLACE. TO
COMPLETE HIS VISION, PALEY
BENT AND TWISTED SECTIONS OF
THE RIBBONS INTO THEIR FINAL
FORM. (SOUNDS OF WORKING)
(MUSIC) PALEY: IT'S THE FIRST
TIME I'VE SEEN IT UP! NEW
SPEAKER: AND WHAT'S YOUR FIRST
IMPRESSION? PALEY: THAT'S THE
WAY IT'S SUPPOSED TO BE; IT
LOOKS GOOD. GENESEE PASSAGE I
FEEL IS EXTREMELY SUCCESSFUL
IN THAT IT BRINGS ALL THOSE
FORMAL RELATIONSHIPS I'VE BEEN
WORKING WITH ALL THE TIME INTO
PLAY; IT DEALS WITH DYNAMISM
AND CHANGE, IT DEALS WITH
GEOMETRIC FORM AND ORGANIC
FORM, THERE'S KIND OF AN
EQUILIBRIUM STRUCK BETWEEN THE
VOLUMES SO IT'S KIND OF FROZEN
IN SPACE AS IT WERE. I THINK
IT DOES THE JOB.
MAJOR FUNDING FOR THIS PROGRAM
WAS PROVIDED BY BETHLEHEM
STEEL , ANNE G. WHITMAN, KLEIN
STEEL SERVICE, ELAINE P. AND
RICHARD U. WILSON FOUNDATION,
BRUNER FOUNDATION, AND